---
layout: post
title: "Using Lerna to manage multiple Ember apps"
description: "Creating addons for shared components across apps is the way to go but this can become messy and difficult to maintain"
tags: "engineering ember"
cenchat_id: "posts_1"
---

Imagine your team maintaining multiple apps that are dependent on some shared components. You might think that creating addons for those components would be the way to go—and it is. But depending on how you modularize your projects, this can lead to creating more packages (not just addons) and it can become messy and difficult to maintain. 

As a few example, here at Cenchat, we have an addon for our UI components and a package for our eslint rules. We saw the pain of updating those packages in a separate branch and doing regression tests in each of our apps before merging. It wasn't scalable since it was constantly a repetitive process of updating our `package.json` and redownloading the package to be tested.

We sought for a monorepo solution in which it came down to using [in-repo addons](https://cli.emberjs.com/release/writing-addons/intro-tutorial/#inrepoaddons). However, the problem with that it's built to be used in a single app only. There's a actually a workaround to make it sharable across apps but you'll have to not use the Ember CLI commands to generate in-repo addon files. This is something we didn't want to do in the long run. Thus, we went to [Lerna](https://lerna.js.org/) and it's where we found the less friction to build our apps.

## Setup

Let's see how a Lerna monorepo can look like at a high level view:

```
+-- packages
|  +-- foobar-eslint-config (type: package, name: @foobar/eslint-config)
|  +-- foobar-addon-1 (type: addon, name: @foobar/addon-1)
|  +-- foobar-addon-2 (type: addon, name: @foobar/addon-2)
|  +-- foobar-app-1 (type: app, name: foobar-app-1)
|  +-- foobar-app-2 (type: app, name: foobar-app-2)
+-- lerna.json
+-- package-lock.json
+-- package.json
```

As you can see above, our directory is a mixture of Ember apps, addons, and normal NPM packages. Creating the packages is just how you'd normally do it.

- `npm init` for normal NPM packages
- `ember addon <addon_name>` for Ember addons
- `ember new <app_name>` for Ember apps

We also namespaced non-apps for organization purposes. This is completely optional, but we'll make use of it for the rest of the article.

## Caveats

Okay, so everything seems normal with our setup above, right? Down the line however, you'll encounter some caveats. Let's discuss each one below with the possible workarounds for it.

### 1. Nested git version control in our monorepo

One additional thing you'll need to do for Ember apps and addons is to delete the `.git` folder inside of it. This is automatically generated by Ember CLI and is something we need to remove in order to prevent having nested git version control in our monorepo.

### 2. Installing Ember addons

Let's say that our `foobar-app-1` already depends on our local package `@foobar/eslint-config`. Our `devDependencies` should now look like this:

```json
{
  "devDependencies": {
    "@foobar/eslint-config": "^0.0.1",
    "@foobar/addon-1": "^0.0.1",
    "ember-cli": "~3.10.0"
  }
}
```

Now if we install a remote Ember addon such as `ember-concurrency`, we'll get the following error:

```bash
npm ERR! code E404
npm ERR! 404 Not Found: @foobar/eslint-config@^0.0.1
```

This is because because under the hood, `ember install ember-concurrency` will run `npm install` at some point. Since `npm install` is incompatible with local packages managed by Lerna (because those packages doesn't exist in the NPM registry), we get the error above.

What you should instead do is to run [`lerna add`](https://github.com/lerna/lerna/tree/master/commands/add#readme) then follow it up with `ember generate`:

```bash
lerna add ember-concurrency --dev
ember generate ember-concurrency
```

If the Ember addon doesn't have any default blueprint for it, `ember generate <addon_name>` would cause an *Unknown blueprint* error. But this is something you can safely ignore.

Alternatively, you can temporarily remove those local packages in your `package.json` dependencies and then run `ember install ember-concurrency`. Once it finishes, you copy back the removed local packages and run `lerna bootstrap`.

## Tips

These are optional but something you just might want to do either way.

### 1. Setup Travis tests

Since we're now in an awesome monorepo, we'll want to take advantage of running tests for all packages in one go. Below is a sample Travis config file which you should place it at the root of your repo.

```yaml
---
language: node_js
node_js:
  - "lts/*"

sudo: false
dist: trusty

addons:
  chrome: stable

cache:
  directories:
    - $HOME/.npm

env:
  global:
    # See https://git.io/vdao3 for details.
    - JOBS=1

before_install:
  - npm config set spin false

script:
  - ./node_modules/.bin/lerna bootstrap
  - ./node_modules/.bin/lerna run lint:hbs
  - ./node_modules/.bin/lerna run lint:js
  - ./node_modules/.bin/lerna run test
```

The config above is similar to the one generated in an Ember app or addon. The only thing we changed is the `script` section in which we're now using Lerna commands.

Next, we'll have to configure our `ember test` command to automatically pick an available port. If we leave it at the default of 7357, our Travis tests may sometimes get the error of *port number is already being used*. Here's how it should look like in your `package.json`:

```json
{
  "scripts": {
    "test": "ember test --test-port 0"
  }
}
```

### 2. Marking packages as private

Just for safety, you might want to set `"private": true` in each of your package's `package.json` file. This prevents an accidental publishing in the NPM registry.

## Wrapping up

There's definitely still some frictions when using Lerna to manage multiple Ember apps. However, those things are something we can live with in exchange of all the goodies we can get from going into a monorepo. Hopefully, the compatbility of Ember CLI with Lerna will improve.

Lastly, our process is definitely not perfect so if you know of any better way to do things please do send us a message.
